# 1.14 - CloudFormation

In this lecture, we'll look at AWS CloudFormation. CloudFormation is an infrastructure as code tool, in the same vein as Terraform. It lets you create template files to define the target state of your infrastructure. As with other infrastructure-as-code tools, one of the main advantages of these tools is that you can commit your template files into a source control repository, and then enjoy all the perks of versioning and code review that you're used to.

AWS provides a number of sample templates as well to kick start your development. Understanding this tool deeply is a requirement for becoming a full time solutions architect.

## Exam Notes

For the Cloud Practitioner exam, all you really need to know is what CloudFormation is, and its main benefits. In that vein, here's A Cloud Guru's summary:

> AWS CloudFormation is a service that helps you model and set up your Amazon Web Services resources so that you can spend less time managing those resources and more time focusing on the applications that run in AWS. You create a template that describes all the AWS resources that you want (E.g. EC2 instances and RDS DB instances) and AWS CloudFormation takes care of provisioning and configuring those resources for you. You don't need to individually create and configure AWS resources and figure out that's dependant on what; AWS CloudFormation handles all of that.
> 

In addition CloudFormation (like Elastic Beanstalk) is free, but the services it provisions are not. Of the two, CloudFormation is completely programmable and can provision almost any AWS service. Elastic Beanstalk is limited in what it can provision and is not programmable.