# 1.15 - Architecting For the Cloud - Traditional vs Cloud Computing

The notes in this lecture are based on Amazon's white paper [Architecting for the Cloud: AWS Best Practices](https://d0.awsstatic.com/whitepapers/AWS_Cloud_Best_Practices.pdf)

## Differences between Traditional and Cloud Computing Environments

The whitepaper outlines 6 key differences:
1. **IT Assets as Provisioned Resources** - The key difference here is that in a traditional computing model, you'd provision capacity based on a theoretical maximum peak. The process would take months and leave you with a lot of idle time, and occasionally insufficient capacity. On AWS, you can provision services on demand to meet capacity requirements, the process takes seconds, and you only pay for what you need.
2. **Global, Available and Scalable Capacity** - AWS allows you to deploy services globally, to the regions that best meet your requirements. Services like the CloudFront CDN can allow you to reduce latency to your users. You can also easily operate production databases and services across the globe to achieve high availability and fault tolerance.
3. **Higher Level Managed Services** - AWS also provides a broad range of storage, database, analytics, application and deployment services. This means that if you want to do something a little more advanced (say, apply machine learning to your dataset), you don't need to hire an expert to get started; AWS can provide you with the services and reduce your external dependencies, which increases speed and lowers costs.
4. **Build-in Security** - AWS services, are, by default, really very secure. In addition, AWS provides a wide range of fully programmable governance capabilities. These let you formalize, continuously monitor and iterate on your infrastructure so that whatever the needs of your organization, you can meet your security requirements. Finally AWS also offers a number of encryption features you can use for data protection and compliance.
5. **Architecting For Cost** - In addition to allowing you to provision services on demand, AWS also provide very granular billing. This allows you to architect your environment while focusing on its cost-profile, which can provide very cost-efficient solutions.
6. **Operations on AWS** - When operations are moved onto AWS, they typically start with a 'lift-and-shift' which just puts their existing architecture in the cloud. They then gradually refactor and, eventually, rearchitect their solution to take advantage of more and more features of AWS and the Cloud. AWS provides tooling, processes and best-practices to support that transition and maximize the benefits of transitioning to the cloud.