# 1.17 - Architecting For the Cloud - Design Principles (Disposable Resources)

The full name of this design principle is **Disposable Resources Instead of Fixed Servers**.

This principle can essentially be boiled down to the thought of *treat your servers like cattle, not pets*. In a traditional model, because your resourced are fixed, expensive and had a long lead time to replace, there was always a lot of work put into making them work without taking them down.

This led to a phenomenon known as **configuration drift**, whereby changes and software patches applied over time resulted in untested and inconsistent configurations across various environments.

By adopting an immutable infrastructure pattern, where, once a server is launched, it is never updated and instead replaced, you can solve these problems. This setup enables servers to be in a more consistent, tested state, makes rollbacks easier to perform, and encourages developers to support a stateless architecture, which facilitates this kind of approach.

## Instantiating Compute Resources

When bringing up new compute resources, the incentive should always be to reduce the amount of manual work necessary to get it going, as this work is error-prone and difficult to replicate. There are a numeber of ways to go about this:

### Bootstrapping

When you launch a new AWS resource (e.g. an EC2 instance or an RDS DB instance), you can execute a pre-created bootstrapping script which automatically changes the default configuration. This script can apply updates, copy data, and do all the other necessary setup work. In addition, you can parametrize configuration details that vary between environments to ensure that you can reuse the same scripts without modification.

AWS provides a number of ways to bootstrap resources. These include providing bootstrapping scripts directly to the instances, using script and config management tools like Chef or Puppet, or using by writing provisioning logic with tools like AWS CloudFormation, which works across almost any AWS resource.

### Golden Image

Certain AWS resource types, like EC2 instances, can be launched from a 'golden image', which is a snapshot of a particular state of that resource. For EC2, this means creating an Amazon Machine Image (AMI) of a particular configured EC2 instance. 

Compared to bootstrapping, this provides a faster start up time, and reduces the dependency on config services and third-party resources. However, it does require a versioning convention to manage the creation of golden images. Amazon recomment the use of a script used to create the bootstrap for the EC2 instance that is the source of your AMIs. This gives you a flexible way to test and modify those images over time.

While most normally used for EC2 instances, golden images can also be applied to resources like Amazon RDS DB instances, or Amazon EBS volumes.

### Containers

Another popular option for developers is Docker, which allows you to package up (or *containerize*) a piece of software in a Docker image that containes everything that the software needs to run, including code, runtime, system tools, system libraries, etc. AWS Elastic Beanstalk, Amazon Elastic Container Service (Amazon ECS), and AWS Fargate, let you deploy and manage multiple containers across a cluster of EC2 instances. You can also build and manage golden Docker images using the ECS Container Registry.

An alternative container environment is Kubernetes, and Amazon Elastic Container Service for Kubernetes (Amazon EKS), which provides analagous services.

### Hybrid

You can also run a combination of bootstrapping and golden image approaches. What usually makes sense here is to use golden images for items that do not change often or introduce external dependencies. A good example is your web server software. Bootstrapping is then used for services that do change often, or vary between your environments (e.g. database hostname configuration).

Amazon Elastic Beanstalk follows the hybrid model. It provides pre-configured runtime environments, but allows you to run bootstrap scripts through .ebextension config files.

## Infrastructure as Code

The application of this principle doesn't need just to be applied at the individual resource level. Instead, you can use infrastructure as code tools liek AWS CloudFormation or Hashicorp's Terraform to automate the creation of your entire infrastructure. There is a [seperate whitepaper](https://d0.awsstatic.com/whitepapers/DevOps/infrastructure-as-code.pdf) which provides more information on this.