# 1.18 - Architecting For the Cloud - Design Principles (Automation)

In traditional IT, you often need to manually react to a variety of events. When deploying to AWS, there is an opportunity for automation, which can improve both your system's stability and the efficiency of your organization. Consider adding one or more of the following to improve your application's resiliency, scalability and performance.

## Serverless Management and Deployment

The advantage of adopting serverless patterns is that they turn the operational focus of your work on the automation of the entire deployment pipeline. It becomes much easier to manage the services, their scale and availability. AWS CodePipeline, AWS CodeBuild and AWS CodeDeploy all support the deployment of these processes

## Infrastructure Management and Deployment

AWS offers a number of infrastructure management and deployment tools. Some are described below

### AWS Elastic Beanstalk

This service and deploy and scale web applications using a range of popular languages, server types and tools. Developers simply upload their application code, and the service handles all the details, including resource provisioning, load balancing, auto scaling, and monitoring.

### Amazon EC2 auto recovery

You can create a CloudWatch alarm to monitor an EC2 instance and automatically recover it if it becomes impaired. Note that this feature is only available for certain instance configurations, and that any in-memory data in the impaired instance will be lost when it is rebooted.

### AWS Systems Manager

You can automatically execute arbitrary commands on your system (e.g. collecting a software inventory, applying OS patches, etc.) which simplifies your operatingmoden and ensures the optimum environment configuration.

### Auto Scaling

You can maintain application availability and scale your EC2, DynamoDB, ECS, and EKS capacity up and down automatically according to conditions that you define. These can improve your system's fault tolerance by running instances across multiple availability zones, and it can help you handle demand spikes and drop offs in a performant, cost-efficient way.

## Alarms and Events

AWS also allows you to configure a number of alarms and events. Some are detailed below.

### Amazon CloudWatch alarms

You can set up alarms that send the Simple Notification Service (SNS) a message when a particular metric is exceeded for a specified period or periods. Those messages can then trigger a range of other events.

### Amazon CloudWatch events

These deliver a near real-time stream of sustem events that you can route to one or more targets, including Lambda functions, Kinesis streams, or SNS topics.

### AWS Lambda Scheduled Events

You can create Lambda functions and run them on a specific schedule. Enough said.

### AWS WAF security automations

AWS WAS is a web application firewall you can configure programmatically to block a variety of attack patterns on your application. This makes security automation easy, enables rapid rule propogation, and fast incident response.