# 1.21 - Architecting For the Cloud - Design Principles (Databases)

Another of the perks of AWS is that, thanks to its managed database services, organizations have a much freer choice in the database technologies they can use. In this note, we'll look at the various use cases for 5 major types of databases: Relational, NoSQL, Data Warehouses, Search, and Graph Databases.

## What to Choose - Motivating Questions

The freedom AWS offers means that developers should now be motivated to *choose database technologies based on their expected workload*.

Some important questions to consider when choosing your database include:

* Is this a read-heavy, write-heavy, or balanced workload? How many reads and writes per second will you need? How will those values change as your user numbers increase?
* How much data will you need to store, and for how long? How quickly will this grow? Is there an upper limit in the near future? What is the size of each object (average, min, max)? How will these objects be accessed?
* What are the requirements for the durability of the data? Is this data store going to be your "source of truth"?
* What are you latency requirements? How many concurrent users do you need to support?
* What is your data model and how are you going to query the data? Are your queries relational in nature? Could you denormalize your schema to create flatter data structures that are easier to scale?
* What extra functionality do you need? Do you need strong integrity controls, or flexibility (i.e. schema-less data stores)? Do you need sophisticated reporting and search capabilities? Are your developers more familiar with relational databases or NoSQL?
* What are the associated licensing costs? Do they consider application development investment, storage, and usage costs over time? Does the licensing model support projected growth? Could cloud-native DBs (like Amazon Aurora) work as alternatives?

## Relational Databases

Relational Databases (also known as RDBS or SQL databases) normalize data into well-defined tabular structures known as tables, which consist of rows and columns. They provide:
* A powerful query language
* Flexible indexing capabilities
* Strong integrity controls
* The ability to combine data from multiple tables in a fast, efficient manner.

Amazon RDS is Amazon's managed service for handling relational databases on AWS.

### Scalability

Scaling a relational database vertically is just a matter of upgrading to a larger DB instance, or adding more and faster storage.

Consider using Amazon Aurora, Amazon's cloud-native RDBS which is designed to provide a much higher throughput compared to a MySQL instance running on the same hardware.

To scale horizontally, we need to consider whether you want to scale read capacity or write capacity.

#### Read Capacity Horizontal Scaling

To scale an RDBS horizontally on AWS, you can create one or more **read replicas**. A read replica is simply a copy of a database that is replicated asynchronously. They are subject to replication lag, and so might be missing some of the latest transactions. Make sure to consider this when allocating queries to different database engines; queries that require to-the-millisecond data should be executed on the primary instance.

Read replicas can not accept any write queries.

#### Write Capacity Horizontal Scaling

To scale write capacity beyond a single DB instance, it is necessary to **shard**, or **partition** your data. In this model, data is split across multiple database schemas, each running in their own autonomous, primary DB instance.

While AWS removes the operational overheads of running these instances, sharding does introduce complexity to your application. IN particular:
* The application's data access layer needs to be aware of how the data is split so it can send its queries to the write instances
* Schema changes need to be performed across multiple database schemas.

It is usually worthwhile to invest time in automating these processes as much as possible.

### High Availability

For any production relational databases, Amazon recommends using the Multi-AZ deployment feature, which creates a synchronously replicated standby instance in a different AZ. If your primary node fails, RDS will automatically perform a failover to the standby instance. Note that this during this process the primary node will not be available, so it is worth providing graceful failure functionality (e.g. read-only behaviour from read replcias) in the interim.

Amazon Aurora additionally provides multi-master capability and supports cross-region replication.

### Anti-Patterns

* If your application primarily indexes and queries data without requiring joins or complex transactions, consider a NoSQL database.
  * This is especially the case if you expect a write-throughput larger than the constraints of a single instance.
* If you have large binary files to store (audio, video, images), put them in an S3 bucket and only store the metadata in your database

## NoSQL Databases

NoSQL databases trade the rigid data structure of SQL databases (and their associated querying capabilities) for a more flexible data model that is very easy to scale horizontally. They are known for:
* supporting a variety of data models, including key-value pair, graph data and JSON
* straightforward deployments
* scalable performace
* high availability
* resilience

Amazon's primary NoSQL product is DynamoDB, which provides consistent, single-digit, millisecond latency at any scale. It can also support both document and key-value store models

### Scalability

NoSQL database engines will typically perform data partitioning and replication to scale both reads and writes in a horizontal fashion. As a result, you don't need to implement data partitioning-aware logic in your application's data access layer.

Amazon's DynamoDB also provides DynamoDB Accelerator (DAX), which is a managed, highly-available, in-memory cache, which can provide significant performance improvements.

### High Availability

DynamoDB synchronously replicates data across 3 facilities in an AWS region, which provides fault tolerance in the case of a service failure or an AZ disruption.

It also provides global tables which are replicated across your selected AWS regions. These enable a managed, multi-region, multi-master databased for massively scaled global applications.

### Anti-Patterns

* If your schema cannot be denormalised, and requires joins or complex transactions, consider a relation DB instead
* If you have large binary files (audio, video, images), store them in S3, and put their metadata in your database.

## Data Warehouse

A data warehouse is a specialised type of of relational database optimized for the analysis and reporting of large quantities of data. They are often used to bring together data from a wide range of disparate sources to provide business insights.

AWS's Data Warehousing solution is known as Amazon Redshift

### Scalability

Amazon Redshift provides efficient storage and optimum query performance by combining massively parallel processing (MPP), columnar data storage, and targeted data compression encoding schemes. The MPP architecture allow you to increase performance by increasing the number of nodes in your data warehouse cluster.

Amazon Redshift Spectrum enables Amazon Redshift SQL queries against exabytes of data in Amazon S3.

### High Availability

Amazon recommend that you deploy production workloads in multi-node clusters, so that data that is written to a node is automatically replicated to other nodes in the cluster.

Data is also automatically backed up to S3.

Finally, Redshift continuously monitors the health of the cluster, and automatically re-replicates data from failed drives, and replaces nodes as necessary

### Anti-Patterns

Amazon Redshift is a SQL-based relational database management system (RDBMS). Thus, it's compatible with other RDBMS and BI tools. However, it is not optimized for funtionality like online transaction processing (OLTP).

If you expect a high concurrency workload that generally involves reading and writing all of the columns for a few records at a time, consider either an RDBS or a NoSQL database.

## Search

Search is often confused with query. A query is a formal database query, which is addressed in formal terms to a specific data set. Search enables datasets to be queried that aren't precisely structured. Search services can typically be used to index and search both structured and free text formats, and can support functionality other databases do not, including:
* Customizable result ranking
* Faceting for filtering
* Synonyms
* Stemming

Amazon offers both CloudSearch and Elasticsearch (ES). 
* **Cloudsearch** is a managed service that requires little config, and scales automatically. 
* **ES** offers an open source API which gives you more control over the configuration details. Additionally, it is often used as an analysics engine for cases such as log analytics, real-time application monitoring, and click stream analytics.

### Scalability

Both services use data partitioning and replication to scale automatically. CloudSearch, however, handles partitioning and replicas automatically, so you don't need to worry about it

### High Availability

Both services offer features to store data redundantly across AZs.

## Graph Databases

A graph datatbase uses a graph based data structure to store data. The nodes of the graph represent data entities, while the edges represent relationships between the data.

Their structue allows for the fast retrieval of complex heirarchical structures. As a result, they are usually used in situations where its vital to be able to navigate complex relationships. Examples include social networks, recommendation engines, and fraud detection.

Amazon Neptune is AWS fully managed graph database solution. It is highly availble, and supports read replicas, point-in-time recovery, continuous backup to S3, and replcation across AZs. Finally, Neptune supports both encryption at rest and in transit.