# 1.26 - Architecting For the Cloud - Design Principles (Security)

AWS is a platform that allows you to formalize the design of security controls in the platform itself. This, and other features, make it much easier to audit your environment in a continuous manner. For more detail, see the [Security at Scale: Governance in AWS](https://d0.awsstatic.com/whitepapers/compliance/AWS_Security_at_Scale_Governance_in_AWS_Whitepaper.pdf) and the [AWS Security Best Practices](https://d0.awsstatic.com/whitepapers/aws-security-best-practices.pdf) whitepapers.

## Defense in Depth

AWS provides a variety of features that allow you to build architectures that have defensive measures in-place at all parts of the stack. Providing security redundancy in this way, so that even if one layer is breached the ones below it remain secure, is called **Defense in Depth**.

Some of the features AWS provides include:
* **Secure VPC Topology** - At the network level, you can build a VPC topology that isolates parts of your infrastructure by using subnets, security groups and routing controls.
* **Firewalls** - Services like AWS WAF (Web Application Firewall) can prevent your web apps from SQL injection and other vulnerabilities
* **Access Control** - Using IAM, you can define granular policies and assign them to users, groups and AWS resources.
* **Encryption** - AWS offers many options to encrypt your data both at rest and in transit.

## Share Security Responsibility with AWS

AWS operates under a shared security responsibility model; AWS is responsible for the security of the underlying cloud infrastructure, and you are responsible for securing the workloads you deploy in AWS. This lets you focus on securing only your core competencies.

## Reduce Priveleged Access

When your servers are programmable resources, there are a number of benefits. One of the most significant is eliminating the need for guest operating system access to production environments. Instead, if there's an issue on an instance, you can just terminate and replace it.

Note however that its vital to ensure that before you terminate your instance, you collect and centrally store its log data, so you can recreate and fix the underlying issues. Amazon CloudWatch Logs provide one way of gathering this info.

Another common security risk is the use of stored, long term credentials or service accounts stored in a config file. On AWS, you can instead use IAM roles to provide short term, finely grained access.

## Security as Code

Tools like AWS CloudFormation allow us to create templates which define *golden environments* which adhere to all our organization's security requirements. These templates allow us to automate the securing of our services, and introduce many of the same benefits infrastructure as code provide to our application infrastructure. Additionally, we can import the templates as products into AWS Service Catalog to further manage the access and deployment of your services.

## Real-Time Auditing

Testing and auditing your environment is vital to keeping it secure as it changes. Traditional, manual, periodic audits are insufficient. On AWS, you can implement continuous monitoring and automation of controls to minimize your exposure to security risks.

Tools that will continually monitor your resources include AWS Config, Amazon Inspector, and AWS Trusted Advisor. Amazon CloudWatch Logs can implement logging on your applications, and AWS CloudTrail can enable it on your API calls. Finally, the records produced by CloudTrail can be stored in an S3 bucket and monitored to look for irregularities.