# 1.4 - Intro to IAM (Identity Access Management)

IAM stands for Identity Acess Management. It's important to note that it is *global*; you don't need to specify a region when you use it, and then you create a user or a group, that user or group is created globally.

The **root account** of your AWS account is the email address you used to set up your AWS accound. It always has full admin access. As such, you should never give those account credentials away to anyone. Always secure it using MFA.

Instead, you should create IAM users with restricted permissions, and distribute those to people who need to access the AWS account.

## Granting Access to IAM users

There are 3 main ways for IAM users to access AWS. They are:

1. **Programmatic access (i.e. the terminal)** - by using an account key ID and a secret access key
2. **AWS Management Console access** - by using a specially enabled password to log in through the AWS Management console
3. **SDK access** - by accessing AWS through SDKs, which we will cover off later.

## Using Roles

When you're provisioning EC2 instances later on, one of the things you'll notice is that you can do this entirely through the command line. In fact, you can actually control your entire AWS account from an EC2 instance using the Account Key ID and Secret Access keys. However, as that might sound, its highly insecure. Anyone who hacks an EC2 instance with those priveleges suddenly has total control over your entire AWS account.

A safer, more secure way to manage permissions on your EC2 instances, and other compute instances, is to use roles that you give specific permissions to and assign. In this way, you could specify that a certain class of EC2 instances has full access to S3, but that's it. Now, if that instance gets hacked, you can just shut it down. Ultimately this is security 101; reduce access to whoever needs it, and leave it there.

Roles set up on AWS are universal (so you don't need to specify a region, much like for users), and they are applied instantly.

## Identity Policies

When creating IAM users, its necessary to set up their permissions. One way to do this is to use groups. A group is just a place to store users with specific permissions, which are applied as policies. Examples might include SysAdmins, Developers and Finance.

Amazon manages a list of ever-expanding permission policies (as of 7th Jan 2018 there were 406) which should handle most normal use cases. These are written in **JSON**, which can come up in the exam.

You can also set the policies directly on users when you create them, but this is typically not the recommended solution.

## Tags

You can also apply generic key-value tags to your users, and organise them using those. Examples include employee numbers, departments and the like.