# 1.8 - Computer Communication and AWS Security Groups

When setting up an EC2 instance, one of the steps you go through as a user is setting the Security Group for your instance. To understand what you're doing here, it helps to briefly discuss how computers communicate.

As an analogy, think about the human body. It has certain organs, like the eyes, ears and skin, which can interpret certain signals, like light, sound and heat respectively. Computers and the ports they communicate over work in a similar way. 4 key examples include:
* **SSH** - Linux computers communicate over SSH, which is accessed over **port 22**
* **RDP** - Microsoft computers communicate using the Remote Desktop Protocol, or RDP, which they do over **port 3389**
* **HTTP and HTTPS** - these protocols are commonly used by the internet, and use **ports 80 and 443 respectively**.

## Firewalls

On the internet, its possible for computers to be completely inundanted with information. That's where firewalls come in. They enable communication through various ports.

For something like a web server, where the whole point of the server is to serve web content to anyone who asks for it, we would want to allow pretty much any IP address to access ports 80 and 443 (though HTTP is now being phased out in favor of HTTPS). However, for something like an SSH connection, we might reasonably only want to allow our own IP address to access to compute instance to manage it.

There are some shorthands to indicate this. Specifically:

* 0.0.0.0/0 says that any IP address should be allowed to access a given port
* X.X.X.X/32 says that only a specific IP address (indicated by X.X.X.X) can access the given port.

AWS lets you set up security groups for your EC2 instances. A security group is just a virtual firewall in the cloud.

## Private Keys with EC2

Even having set up your security group in AWS to allow users to access it freely, you'll still need to use a keypair to ssh onto your EC2 instance. AWS will generate one for you when you create your instance, so this shouldn't be an issue, but hold onto it, as once you've downloaded your private key once you can't get it back.

A final note, always make sure to design for failure. You should always have an EC2 instance in each AZ, and you should always have more than one instance.