# 1.9 - Load Balancers

For the Certified Cloud Practitioner exam, there's really not a lot we need to know about load balancers. We'll briefly cover off some details.

There are 3 kinds of Elastic Load Balancers (or ELBs) currently offered by AWS. Details about them are outside the scope of the cloud practitioner exam. Nonetheless, they are:

* **Application Load Balancers** - Amazon's description of an Applcation Load Balancer is:
  > Choose an Application Load Balancer when you need a flexible feature set for your web applications with HTTP and HTTPS traffic. Operating at the request level, Application Load Balancers provide advanced routing and visibility features targeted at application architectures, including microservices and containers.

  Application Load Balancers are Level 7 aware, which means that they can make intelligent decisions on how to load balance depending on the actual code you're running. 
* **Network Load Balancers** - 
  > Choose a Network Load Balancer when you need ultra-high performance and static IP addresses for your application. Operating at the connection level, Network Load Balancers are capable of handling millions of requests per second while maintaining ultra-low latencies.
* **Classic Load Balancer** - These are gradually being phased out. They're suitable in test and dev, and for keeping costs low, but don't overdo that. At this point in time, they should only really be used if you're using an application running in the EC2-Classic network.

