# 2.1 - How AWS Pricing Works - Key Principles

We made it to Section 3. Go us! In this section, we'll be looking at billing, a crucial part of the AWS Certified Cloud Pracititioner exam. We'll start by going through the [How Pricing Works](https://d0.awsstatic.com/whitepapers/aws_pricing_overview.pdf) whitepaper. So let's get to it!

## Key Principles

### Understand the fundamentals of pricing

There are 3 key drivers of cost in AWS. They are:
* **Compute** - Typically, you pay hourly from the time a resource is launched to the time it is terminated, unless you've made a reservation with a pre-agreed cost
* **Storage** - Pay per GB stored
* ***Outbound* Data Transfer** - Aggregated across services and then charged at the outbound data transfer rate.

The specifics of these charecteristics will vary depending on the specific service.

Note that in general, there is no charge for inbound data transfer or data transfer between AWS services in the same region (though there are some exceptions, so be sure to check).

Finally, note that prices are exclusive of applicable taxes and duties including VAT and sales tax.

### Start early with cost optimization

It's never too early to start thinking about how to optimize your costs. In general, it is easiest to put cost visibility and control mechanisms into your environment before it grows large and complex. This will allow you to best take advantage of cloud computing,

### Maximize the power of flexibility

AWS services are priced independently, transparently and, unless you opt for a reservation model, have no minimum commitment. By only paying for services on an as-needed basis, you can both reduce costs and allow your business be much more flexible in the technologies it chooses to use.

### Use the right pricing model for the job

AWS offers several pricing models, depending on the product. These include:

* **On Demand** - You pay for compute or database capacity with no long-term commitments or upfront payments.
* **Dedicated Instances** - You can run EC2 instances in a virtual private cloud (VPC) on hardware dedicated exclusively to a single customer, you.
* **Spot Instances** - An EC2 pricing mechanism that lets you purchase spare computing capacity with no upfront commitment at discounted hourly rates
* **Reservations** - You can receive up to a 75% discount on capacirt by paying ahead of time. Services you can reserve include:
  * EC2 instances
  * DynamoDB capacity
  * ElastiCache nodes
  * RDS instances
  * Redshift nodes