# 2.3 - How AWS Pricing Works - EC2 Pricing Details

## Pricing Models

There are 4 different ways to pay for EC2 instances: on-demand instances, reserved instances, spot instances and dedicated hosts. We'll go through these one by one.

### On-Demand Instances

With on-demand instances, you pay for **compute capacity per hour or per second**. There are no long term commitments or upfront payments.

You can increase or decrease capacity at will and only pay the specied rates of the instances you use.

On-Demand Instances are recommended for:
* Users who are looking for flexibility in their instance types and compute capacity with no strings attached
* Applications with short-term, spike or unpredictable workloads that *cannot* be interrupted
* Applications which are being developed or tested on EC2 for the first time.

### Reserved Instances

Reserved instances provide a significant (up to 75%) discount compared to On-Demand instances in exchange for the user's commitment to either a 1 or 3 year contract.

When reserved instances are assigned to a specific Availability Zone, they provide a capacity reservations, which provides additional confidence in your ability to launch instances when you need them. 

Reserved Instances are recommended for:
* Applications with steady-state usage
* Applications that require reserved capacity
* Customers who can commit to using EC2 over a 1 or 3 year period.

### Spot Instances

Spot instances allow you to request spare EC2 computing capacity for up to 90% off the On-Demand price.

The Spot price is set up EC2, and fluctuates periodically based on the supply of and demand for Spot instance capacity. If your maximum bid exceeds the current Spot price, your bid request is fulfilled and the instances will start running. They will stop either when you manually terminate them, or when the Spot price exceeds your maximum bid, whichever comes first.

Spot instances are recommended for:
* Applications that have flexible start and end times
* Applications that are only feasible at very low compute prices
* Applications with workloads that *can* be interrupted
* Users with urgent computing needs for a lot of additional capacity

### Dedicated Hosts

A dedicated host is a physical EC2 server dedicated for your use. While not suitable for most users, they can be useful for:
* Users who have (and need to use) existing server-bound software licenses such as Windows Server, SQL Server, and SUSE Linux Enterprise Server
* Users who need to meet specific compliance requirements.

## Per-second billing

Originally, AWS was released with the ability to use instances for an hour (which was revolutionary at the tim). Nowadays, the world has adapted, and so, since 2017, AWS has allowed per-second billing across On-Demand, Reserved and Spot instances. Provisioned storage for EBS volumes is also billed in 1-second increments.

## Estimating Amazon EC2 costs

The factors to consider when estimating the costs of your EC2 instance are:
* **Clock hours of server time** - In essence, resources incur charges when they're running.
* **Instance type** - EC2 provides a wide range of instance types (FIGHT DR MC PXZ is the acronym), which are priced individually
* **Pricing model** - i.e. On-Demand, Reserved, Spot or Dedicated Hosts
* **Number of instances** - More instances = more dolla.
* **Load balancing** - An ELB can be used to distribute traffic among EC2 instances. The number of hours it runs and the amount of data it processes contributes to its monthly costs.
* **Detailed Monitoring** - Amazon CloudWatch allows you to enable "detailed monitoring" (as distinguished from the default "basic monitoring"). This is charged at a fixed monthly rate, with partial months charged on an hourly pro-rata, per instance-hour rate.
* **Auto Scaling** - Auto scaling by itself incurs no additional bees, beyond the CloudWatch fees.
* **Elastic IP addresses** - You can have one Elastic IP (EIP) address associated with a running instance at no charge
* **Operating systems and software packages** - A number of operating systems are available at no additional price, including:
  * Red Hat Enterprise Linux
  * SUSE Enterprise Linux
  * Windows Server
  * Oracle Enterprise Linux
  AWS has also partnered with companies like Microsoft, IBM and others to make it possible to run commercial software packages (e.g. Microsoft SQL Server) on EC2 instances.
  For commercial software packages AWS doesn't provide, e.g. Windows Server applications like Microsoft Sharepoint or Microsoft Exchange, you'll need to get a license from the vendors. You can also bring you existing license to the cloud through specific vendor programs like the Microsoft License Mobility Through Software Assurance Program.